---
title: "'Password' or 'Passphrase'"
layout: page

type: regular
comments: true
---

So apparently pass phrases are the new 'secure password' - kinda the step you
get to when you finally accept that your users are going to use something like
'password' for their account password. The natural step here is to reinforce a
secure password strategy by requiring x numbers, x special characters and a
certain length - but I find this really annoying when I just want to get signed
up, and that means that other users do as well. Something I've just been
thinking about is the naming semantics of password field - labeling it
'password' immediately prompts users to think of an actual word - if they are
computer-savvy, then they might throw a symbol or number in, but most likely it
will still be based on an actual word. I wonder what would happen if you
labelled this field 'Passphrase' though? I think it is inevitable that many
users will recognize the pattern of the form rather than the labelling of the
fields and still enter their 'password', but just maybe there will be some
users who get the semantics of the label, and enter a sentence, instead of a
word. Even though there may not be special characters in that sentence, it's
still just as, if not more secure from dictionary attacks - guessing one word
is pretty easy, but it's much, much harder to guess a string of words, in the
correct order - especially if one or two of those words are obfuscated with
some special characters or numbers. Just a thought.... but interesting
nonetheless.

