---
title: Achievements on Coderwall
layout: page

type: regular
comments: true
---

Well, it's taken weeks for [Coderwall](http://coderwall.com) to finally get
it's crawler to hit my [Github Profile](https://github.com/joshmcarthur), but
I've finally [got more badges](http://coderwall.com/joshmcarthur). I've been
moving some old PHP stuff of mine onto Github for people to use, so that's
where I've gotten the PHP badge from. As part of my personal campaign to master
at least one other language apart from Ruby, I've also been working on some
Django tutorials (Django is a Python web framework), so have earned another
badge there. A happy accident was the walrus badge - I didn't realize I had
projects up in so many different languages. Probably next on this list might be
the 'Forked 20' achievement for my Spree extension, [spree-import-products]
(https://github.com/joshmcarthur/spree-import-products) - I'm not so sure this
is a good thing, though - the forks-to-pull-requests ratio is too low on this
project - most likely indicating that I need to work more on making the
extension easier to use for my general audience - forks without pull requests
mean that people are taking their own copies to change them for their needs,
rather than to work on bugfixes and general improvements. We'll have to see.
But... yay, more achievements! If you've got a Github account, I highly
recommend you check out Coderwall - the achievements are largely irrelevant to
any sort of reputation, but it's a really nice way of finding interesting
Github members with interesting projects.

